---
title: Compatibility checks
taxonomy:
    category: docs
---
As the System Device is running Mender, it stores all information about currently installed Artifacts in its database, allowing direct comparisons between a given Artifact and what's currently present on the Device. This is used to check if an Artifact is currently installed and if an Artifact can be installed on the Device.

However, as the Components do not need to run Mender in order to be updated by the Orchestrator, there's no requirement for them to keep track of all the data from the Artifact.

To allow the Components to handle the updates and not require them to have a database, Orchestrator checks are different.

This section contains details on how Orchestrator checks whether an Artifact is currently installed on a Component and if an Artifact can be installed on a Component.

## Artifact versioning for Components

### Interface requirements

Every Interface other than:

* [Interface for updating the System Device running Mender](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-orchestrator-support/blob/main/interfaces/v1/rootfs-image)

* Any Interface communicating with a Component running Mender

Must include a version identifier in its Provides data using the following format: `rootfs-image.<INTERFACE_NAME>.version`

For the System Device (or any Component running mender-update), `rootfs-image.version` is reported automatically. In these cases, providing an additional `rootfs-image.<INTERFACE_NAME>.version` field is prohibited.

This requirement enables the Orchestrator to interact with the metadata automatically generated by mender-artifact. When building an Artifact for an Interface, mender-artifact automatically adds versioning information as defined in the [Software Versioning](../../../08.Artifact-creation/11.Software-versioning/docs.md#application-updates-update-modules) specification.

### Usage
The `rootfs-image.<INTERFACE_NAME>.version` field is used for two operations:

Inventory Reporting: The Component reports this specific field to the Mender Server as its currently installed software version.

Checking if an Artifact is currently installed: Orchestrator compares the reported version against the incoming Artifact's `artifact_provides` to determine if the Artifact is already installed, preventing redundant updates.

### Compatibility and Dependency Checking
Orchestrator follows standard Mender logic for checking Artifact compatibility, i.e. whether an Artifact can be installed on a Component:

Artifact Depends: If an Artifact contains `artifact_depends` metadata for a specific value, the Orchestrator validates that the target Component meets these requirements.

No Dependency: If no `artifact_depends: rootfs-image.<INTERFACE_NAME>.version` is specified, the version information is not checked for compatibility, and the update is permitted regardless of the version currently installed on the Component.

### Flexibility

The requirement for the version field does not restrict the inclusion of other metadata. Users can add any arbitrary key-value pairs to the Provides section of an Interface, exactly as they would for standard Mender Artifacts.

These fields will be checked as for any other Artifact, i.e. if an Artifact depends on a specific field, it will be installed only if the Interface includes it in `Provides` command output.

### Example

Creating an Artifact for an `rtos-interface`:

```bash
INTERFACE=rtos-interface
COMPONENT_TYPE=rtos
VERSION=rtos-v1
PAYLOAD=$VERSION-payload

touch $PAYLOAD
mender-artifact \
  write module-image \
  --type $INTERFACE \
  --compatible-types $COMPONENT_TYPE \
  --file $PAYLOAD \
  --output-path $VERSION.mender \
  --artifact-name $VERSION

rm $PAYLOAD
```

Will result in an Artifact like this:

```
Mender Artifact:
  Name: rtos-v1
  Format: mender
  Version: 3
  Signature: no signature
  Compatible types: [rtos]
  Provides group: 
  Depends on one of artifact(s): []
  Depends on one of group(s): []
  State scripts: []

Updates:
  - Type: rtos-interface
    Provides:
      rootfs-image.rtos-interface.version: rtos-v1
    Depends: {}
    Clears Provides: [rootfs-image.rtos-interface.*]
    Metadata: {}
    Files:
      - checksum: e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855
        modified: 2026-04-27 15:16:29 +0200 CEST
        name: rtos-v1-payload
        size: 0
```

To ensure that, while deploying this Artifact to a Component that already uses it, the Artifact is not installed again, the Interface must report `rootfs-image.rtos-interface.version=rtos-v1` in its Provides output.

## Topology's component_type and Artifact's device_type relationship
<!--AUTOVERSION: "mender-artifact/blob/%/Documentation/artifact-format-v3.md"/ignore-->
When deploying updates to Systems, Mender Orchestrator abstracts the verification of Artifact compatibility based on `component_type`. While [Mender Artifacts](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-artifact/blob/master/Documentation/artifact-format-v3.md?target=_blank) rely on the `artifact_depends: device_type` field for compatibility matching, Components do not - and must not - report a `device_type` key from their Interfaces for `Provides` command.

The Orchestrator uses the `component_type` from the Topology corresponding to a given component, and compares this value against the incoming Artifact's `device_type`.

This is done to prevent errors that can arise from mismatching `component_type` and `device_type`. This way, each Component has only `component_type` which defines its type exclusively.

### Interface requirements

Returning a `device_type` field in `Provides` command output is prohibited.

### Compatibility with Components running Mender

Each Component that runs Mender, has its own `device_type` built-in. See how Mender determines the `device_type` [here](../../../03.Client-installation/07.Configuration/50.Configuration-options/docs.md#devicetypefile).

Since the Orchestrator uses the `component_type` from the Topology to verify Artifact compatibility, Component's built-in `device_type` must be equal to the corresponding `component_type` in the Topology. Otherwise, the Artifact created for a given `component_type` will be rejected by the Component running Mender, as the Artifact's `artifact_depends` will not match the Component's built-in `device_type`.

### Example

Given an example [Topology](../../06.Examples/01.Mock-components/docs.md#demo-environment):

```yaml
api_version: mender/v1
kind: topology
system_type: "system-core"

components:
  - component_type: gateway
    interface: rootfs-image

  - component_type: rtos
    interface: rtos-interface
    interface_args: ["1"]

  - component_type: rtos
    interface: rtos-interface
    interface_args: ["2"]
```

When creating Artifacts for this system, `gateway` and `rtos` `--compatible-types` flag must be used to ensure that the Artifacts can be installed. Just as in the [example](#example) above.

This means that the System Device in this example must have the built-in `device_type` set to `gateway`. Otherwise, when deploying an Artifact for `gateway` `component_type`, it will be rejected by the System Device, due to the Artifact's `artifact_depends: device_type` value and the built-in `device_type` mismatch.
