---
title: Introduction
taxonomy:
    category: docs
---

Mender is a secure and robust software update system designed to handle
large number of devices. Mender is designed according to a simple client/server
architecture, allowing central management of deployments to all devices.

## The architecture of a software update

The following diagram shows the high level flow of data involved in deploying
software updates.

![updater-components](updater-components.png)

The process begins with the **build system** generating a new version of
software for a device. The build system can be a workstation creating a simple
application update or a more standard component, such as Jenkins and Yocto
Project. It creates **Mender Artifacts** in the format required by the target
device. There will be different Mender Artifacts for each type of device that
Mender manages.

You upload the Mender Artifacts to the Mender server, which is the central point
for deploying updates to a fleet of devices. Among other things, it monitors the
current software version present on each device and schedules the roll out of
new releases.

Finally, each **Device** runs the Mender client, which polls the Mender server
periodically to report its status and to discover if there is a software update
waiting. If there is, the update client downloads the artifact and performs the
installation.

The current Mender client supports devices running embedded Linux and other
clients exist for other OSes and hardware such as microcontrollers.


## Client modes of operation

You can run the Mender client in a _standalone_ or _managed_ mode.

In _managed_ mode the Mender client runs as a daemon and will regularly poll the
server, automatically apply updates, reboot, report and commit the update. This
is the best way to run Mender for most large-scale deployments, as the
deployments are centrally managed across many devices, but it requires to set up
and connect clients to the Mender server.

In _standalone_ mode, you initiate the updates locally on the device instead of
connecting the Mender client to a Mender server. A common use-case is to perform
updates from e.g an USB flash drive. To learn more visit
[Standalone deployments](../../06.Artifact-creation/06.Standalone-deployment/docs.md)


## Update types

###  Robust system updates

One of the primary requirements of any update system is that it should be robust.
It must be able to recover from an update that fails, including loss of power
or network connectivity during the update process.

The simplest and most robust way to update a device is to write a new file
system image directly to the flash partition. Mender comes with built-in support
for  a dual redundant scheme (also known as A/B scheme), which ensures that the
device always comes back to a working state on failure.

During system update, the client writes the new version to the inactive
partition. When complete, the client verifies the checksum. If all is well, it
sets a flag in the bootloader that will cause it to flip the active and inactive
partitions around on the next reboot. Then the system reboots.

On the first boot following an update, the Mender client will **commit** the
update. This sets a flag in the bootloader that indicates that the update was
applied successfully.

If something causes the device to reboot before committing the update, the
bootloader knows that something went wrong, and will **roll back** to the
previous version by flipping the active and inactive partitions back again.

One consequence of the system update is that the update will replace all the
files in a filesystem, thereby deleting any new or changed files that had been
placed there. In other words, to be updatable a file system needs to be
**stateless**.

You have to store all files that you modify on the devices in a separate
partition. It may include network parameters, user configuration changes, etc..


### Application updates

The definition of an application update can vary depending on specific user
requirements, e.g an application can be a single file, directory or even a
container image. For this reason it is difficult to enforce **one** way of
deploying application updates.

To support application updates in a generic way, Mender provides the [Update Module](../../06.Artifact-creation/08.Create-a-custom-Update-Module/docs.md) framework.

![application-updates](application-updates.png)


### Proxy deployments

Using the [Update Module](../../06.Artifact-creation/08.Create-a-custom-Update-Module/docs.md) framework
it is also possible to deploy updates to peripheral devices, e.g
microcontrollers or sensors connected to a device running Linux.

Example using the DFU protocol to update an external microcontroller:

![proxy-deployment](proxy-deployment.png)

You can find more information on above example in the
[How to do a proxy deployment to an FRDM-K64F](https://hub.mender.io/t/how-to-do-a-proxy-deployment-to-an-frdm-k64f-device-connected-to-a-raspberry-pi-3/1619?target=_blank) tutorial.
